doc: Merges CLOUDP-274025 docs & examples branch - DONT MERGE YET (#3079)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide.md

The process to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` using the `moved` block varies if you are using `modules` or the resource directly. Module maintainers can upgrade their implementation to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` by making this operation transparent to their users. To learn how, review the examples from a [module maintainer](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/module_maintainer) and [module user](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/module_user) point of view.

If you are managing the resource directly, see [this example](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/basic).

The basic experience when using the `moved` block is as follows:
1. Before starting, run `terraform plan` to make sure that there are no planned changes.
2. Add the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition.

>   - Set the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` in order to use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0. You can also define the environment variable in your local development environment so your tools can use the new format and help you with linting and auto-completion.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to mention here that the IDE the user is using will mark the resource as wrongly defined if they set the env var and use the TPF syntax?

Author: I think that's very detailed and can confuse people reading it

Author: thanks for the suggestion anyway

>   - **Coming soon**: You will be able to use an Atlas CLI plugin to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This will be the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration while keeping the original Terraform expressions. See the [section below](#alternatives-to-using-the-mongodb-atlas-cli-plugin-to-generate-the-mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster-resource-definition) on what alternatives you have when you encounter plugin limitations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Coming soon**: You will be able to use an Atlas CLI plugin to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This will be the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration while keeping the original Terraform expressions. See the [section below](#alternatives-to-using-the-mongodb-atlas-cli-plugin-to-generate-the-mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster-resource-definition) for the available alternatives.
```

More information about the main changes between the two resources can be found [in the below section](#main-changes-between-mongodbatlas_cluster-and-mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster).

## If I am using `mongodbatlas_cluster`, why should I move to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`?

Due to its schema simplicity, `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource is unable to support most of the latest MongoDB Atlas features, such as [Multi-Cloud Clusters](https://www.mongodb.com/blog/post/introducing-multicloud-clusters-on-mongodb-atlas), [Asymmetric Sharding](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/advanced-cluster-new-sharding-schema), [Independent Scaling of Analytics Node Tiers](https://www.mongodb.com/blog/post/introducing-ability-independently-scale-atlas-analytics-node-tiers) and more.

> On the other hand, not only `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` covers all what `mongodbatlas_cluster` can do, but it offers all existing MongoDB Atlas functionalities and will continue to do so going forward.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the other hand, not only does `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` cover everything that `mongodbatlas_cluster` can do, but it offers all existing MongoDB Atlas functionalities and will continue to do so going forward.
```

> Having that in mind, to access all the latest functionalities and stay up to date with our best offering we recommend you to start planning your move to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`.

Reviewer 4: @marcosuma how do you feel about adding a note that we will be moving mongodbatlas_cluster to deprecated in the next major version, something like: 
```suggestion
Having that in mind, to access all the latest functionalities and stay up to date with our best offering we recommend you to start planning your move to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`.   Further, so that we can keep focused on the overall experience of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` we will be deprecating `mongodbatlas_cluster` in the next major provider version, 2.0.0, timeline TBD.  Starting your planning now will ensure you be prepared for this future.  
```

Reviewer 2: Sound good to me, I also felt something was missing when I wrote it but wasn't 100% sure of mentioning the deprecation.

I like the TBD part that solves my doubt. I am going to go with:
```
To maintain our focus on enhancing the overall experience with `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`, we will be phasing out `mongodbatlas_cluster` in the upcoming major provider version, 2.0.0, with the timeline yet to be determined. Begin your planning now to ensure you're ready for this transition.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

### What is the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` Preview of MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0?

> To facilitate the operation of moving to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` for our customers, we decided to enable support for the [`moved` block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved). This functionality needs the resource to be implemented using the [Terraform Plugin Framework](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework), whereas our existing implementation [is using the SDKv2](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/sdkv2). Given the considerable changes between the two frameworks and the breaking changes it causes, we have decided to release a preview version of the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` usable under an environment variable and keep the existing implementation as-is to avoid breaking existing users. 

Reviewer 3: Q: do we need to supply more information about the breaking changes this can cause here? Might be a natural place and I'm sure customers will think the same thing while reading this
```suggestion
To make it easier to migrate to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`, we decided to enable support for the [`moved` block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved). This functionality needs the resource to be implemented using the [Terraform Plugin Framework](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework), whereas our existing implementation [uses the SDKv2](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/sdkv2). Given the considerable changes between the two frameworks and the breaking changes it causes, we have decided to release a preview version of the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` usable under an environment variable and keep the existing implementation as-is to avoid breaking existing users. 
```

Reviewer 4: plus 1 - good place to link to them

Reviewer 2: ack, I'll add a link to the breaking changes

Once the MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0 is released, only the new version will remain and the environment variable won't be needed.
More information about the preview version of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` can be found in the [resource documentation page](../resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%25202.0.0%2529).

## How should I move to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`?

> To move from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` we offer two alternatives:

Reviewer 3: q: should we link to the Migration using the Moved Block header below, instead?

Reviewer 2: fair point, yes

1. (Recommended) Use the [`moved` block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved) using the Preview of MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0 for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`

> 1. Manually use the import command with the [`mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource](../resources/advanced_cluster)

Reviewer 3: should we link to the heading for this below, instead?

### Best Practices Before Migrating

Before doing any migration, create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state).

## Migration using the Moved block (recommended)

> This is our recommended method to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`. The [moved block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved) is a Terraform feature that allows to move between resource types. It's conceptually similar to execute `removed` and `import` commands separately but it brings the convenience of doing it in one step. It also works for `modules` and does not require direct access to the Terraform state file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is our recommended method to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`. The [moved block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved) is a Terraform feature that allows to move between resource types. It's conceptually similar to running `removed` and `import` commands separately but it brings the convenience of doing it in one step. It also works for `modules` and does not require direct access to the Terraform state file.
```

We recommend that you follow this migration process unless you can't meet the following requirements:
 - Terraform version 1.8 or later is required, more information in the [State Move page](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/resources/state-move).
 - MongoDB Atlas Provider version 1.29 or later is required.

>  - Enable the preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0 of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` by setting the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`.

Reviewer 3: Q: are there other breaking changes introduced in the v2 preview? Wondering if users need to do anything else in order to ensure that they can still work with their clusters after an upgrade / enable preview / migrate scenario.

Reviewer 4: I think these are more the pre-reqs, which perhaps we make this more clear?) The first and 2nd bullet are more pre-reqs, while the last is more an instruction.  Then to JW's point, we would need to make clear the changes that can happen when not using a module.

Reviewer 2: Hoping I am covering everything about these two comments:

- regarding breaking changes: users don't need to do anything else special after they've done the migration. They can use the advanced_cluster resource regularly. I can't think of anything to mention here
- prereqs: @themantissa I've made it explicit these are **Prerequisites:** and also rephrased the third point to say the pre-req is the ability to set an environment variable
- changes that happen when not using a module: related to the first point, @themantissa I wouldn't put it as a pre-req, but there is a text right after this list that explains the different migration process when using module and resource:

> The process to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` using the `moved` block varies if you are using `modules` or the resource directly. [...]

   - More information can be found in the [resource documentation page](../resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%25202.0.0%2529).

> The process to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` using the `moved` block varies if you are using `modules` or the resource directly. Module maintainers can upgrade their implementation to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` by making this operation transparent to their users. To learn how, we recommend you to review the examples from a [module maintainer](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/module_maintainer) and [module user](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/module_user) point of view.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The process to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` using the `moved` block varies if you are using `modules` or the resource directly. Module maintainers can upgrade their implementation to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` by making this operation transparent to their users. To learn how, review the examples from a [module maintainer](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/module_maintainer) and [module user](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/module_user) point of view.
```

> If you are managing the resource directly, you can [refer to this example](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/basic).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are managing the resource directly, see [this example](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/basic).
```

The basic experience when using the `moved` block is as follows:
1. Before starting, run `terraform plan` to make sure that there are no planned changes.
2. Add the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition.
  - Set the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` in order to use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0. You can also define the environment variable in your local development environment so your tools can use the new format and help you with linting and auto-completion.

>   - You can use the [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This is the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration keeping the original Terraform expressions. Please be aware of the [plugin limitations](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform#limitations) and always review the generated configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - You can use the [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This is the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration while keeping the original Terraform expressions. Please be aware of the [plugin limitations](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform#limitations) and always review the generated configuration.
```

>   - You can use the [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This is the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration keeping the original Terraform expressions. Please be aware of the [plugin limitations](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform#limitations) and always review the generated configuration.

Reviewer 4: In addition to JW's comment, isn't this coming later?   If so we can leave it but put [COMING SOON] perhaps and then update once out?

Reviewer 2: the CLI will be out there. What's coming later is the specific support for `dynamic` blocks. At least that's how I was thinking, but maybe you prefer to just launch the whole CLI plugin only once `dynamic` is ready?

>   - Alternatively, you can use the `terraform plan -generate-config-out=adv_cluster.tf` method to create the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition, or create it manually.

Reviewer 2: this needs rewriting because:
- if you are using a module, you can't use `terraform plan -generate-config-out=adv_cluster.tf`
- if you are using the resource directly, there's a preliminary step which is to temporarily add the `import` block, run this command, and then remove the `import` block

@lantoli

Reviewer 3: following up on Marco's comment: if you are using a module and can't use the AtlasCLI plugin, is creating the resource definition manually the only way to migrate? Not sure how common this is, but if users will fall into this group it might be worth adding a table or something to quickly show who should use which method

Reviewer 2: Going to create a section below, good call!

Reviewer 2: Done, @lantoli @jwilliams-mongo if you want to have a look

3. Comment out or delete the `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource definition.
4. Update the references from your previous cluster resource: `mongodbatlas_cluster.this.XXXX` to the new `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this.XXX`.
   - Double check [output-changes](#output-changes) to ensure the underlying configuration stays unchanged.
5. Add the `moved` block to your configuration file, e.g.:
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
}
```

> 6. Run `terraform plan` and make sure that there are no planned changes, only the moved block should be shown. If it shows other changes, update the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original `mongodbatlas_cluster` configuration. This is an example of no planned changes except the move:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. Run `terraform plan` and make sure that there are no planned changes, only the moved block should be shown. If it shows other changes, update the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original `mongodbatlas_cluster` configuration. This is an example output of a successful plan, notice no planned changes other than those for the move:
```

```text
 # mongodbatlas_cluster.this has moved to mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
     resource "mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster" "this" {
         name                                 = "my-cluster"
         # (24 unchanged attributes hidden)
     }

 Plan: 0 to add, 0 to change, 0 to destroy.
```

7. Run `terraform apply` to apply the changes. The `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource will be removed from the Terraform state and the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource will be added.

> 8. At this moment you can delete the `moved` block from your configuration file, although it's recommended to keep it to help track the migrations.

Reviewer 4: I would flip to hashicorp's recommendation first: 
```suggestion
8. Hashicorp recommends to keep the move block in your configuration file to help track the migrations, however you can delete the `moved` block from your configuration file without any adverse impact.
```

1. Have an existing cluster without any Terraform configuration and want to import and manage your cluster with Terraform.
2. Have existing `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource(s) but you can't use the [recommended approach](#migration-using-the-moved-block-recommended).

**Note**: We recommend the [`moved` block](#migration-using-the-moved-block-recommended) method as it's more convenient and less error-prone. If you continue with this method, you can still use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0 by setting the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` to avoid having to migrate again in the future.

The process works as follow:
1. If you have an existing `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource, remove it from your configuration and delete it from the state file, e.g.: `terraform state rm mongodbatlas_cluster.this`. Alternatively a `removed block` (available in Terraform 1.7 and later, don't confuse with `moved block`) can be used to delete it from the state file, e.g.:
```terraform
  removed {
    from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this

    lifecycle {
      destroy = false
    }
  }
```

> 2. Find the import IDs of the clusters you want to migrate: `{PROJECT_ID}-{CLUSTER_NAME}`, such as `664619d870c247237f4b86a6-legacy-cluster`

Reviewer 3: where do you find this?

Reviewer 2: project-id and cluster-name can be found in a lot of places and a lot of ways, not sure if it's worth it to explain where and how

> **Objective**: This guide explains how to replace the `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource with the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource. The data source(s) migration only requires [output changes](#output-changes) as data sources only read clusters.

Reviewer 4: Keeping this file and adding docs/guides/advanced-cluster-preview-provider-v2.md is going to be utterly way too confusing.  It's way too close in names, has repetition, and is thinking more about how this works than about how a user would discover their options and know which they should use.   We should keep this file but add in the move work as a 2nd option along with details that are in the actual release file. 

# Migration Guide: Cluster to Advanced Cluster
<<Explanation that we have more than one method.   That our next provider version 2.0.0 will contain the new move block method without needing to use environment variables.>>
* Move block method preview (recommended), what provider version it is supported in 
Explanation of why you would use this method.  Then links to the content of advanced-cluster-preview-provider-v2.md on the single page.
* Manual method: what provider version it was supported in (< =the last one we released before this new feature).  Explanation of why you would use this method.  Then links to the content of this page on a single page

Reviewer 2: Since the refactoring has been done, resolving this comment (aiming to have clarity on what's left and what's not)

  - After: Use `mongodbatlas_cloud_backup_schedule` resource instead.

## Best Practices Before Migrating

Before doing any migration create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state).

## Migration using Moved block (recommended)

The [moved block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved) is a Terraform feature that allows to move between resource types. It's conceptually similar to do `removed` and `import` but it's more convenient as it's done in one step, and can be used in `modules`. This is our recommended method to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`.

>  The main requirements are:

Reviewer 2: Should we add:
- ability to set an environment variable
- Atlas CLI and plugin installed

Reviewer 5: would argue that Atlas CLI is not a requirement for moved block, they can be used independently (e.g. define advanced_cluster config manually and use moved block)

Author: I agree, I wouldn't have them as (hard) requirements

>  The main requirements are:

Reviewer 2: should we have a sentence to say that if you can't meet this requirement you can follow _the other guide below_?

Author: changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/00cbe4c3491d0b81bbe6a6a66355c20a2a8df7c4

- Comment out or delete the `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource definition.
- Add the `moved` block to your configuration file, e.g.:
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
}
```
- Run `terraform plan` and make sure that there are no planned changes, only the moved should be shown. **Important**: Don't apply until planning shows only the moved changes. If it shows other changes, you will need to keep updating the `mongodb_atlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original `mongodbatlas_cluster` configuration.
- Run `terraform apply` to apply the changes. The `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource will be removed from the Terraform state and the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource will be added.
- At this moment you can delete the `moved` block from your configuration file, although it's recommended to keep it to help track the migrations.

You can find full-detailed examples in [migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster).

> ## Migration using `terraform plan -generate-config-out=adv_cluster.tf`

Reviewer 5: Since the initial option is moved block (related to state manipulation), should this alternative make emphasis on using import block?

`atlas cli plugin` or `plan -generate-config-out` could be used in both of the options for generating the new advanced_cluster config.

Author: you're right, changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/e12a19e692efaca0a15ea8fd6cee511d6a2eb061

Reviewer 5: great, thanks

This method uses only [Terraform native tools](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/import/generating-configuration) and is ideal if you:
1. Have an existing cluster without any Terraform configuration and want to manage your cluster with Terraform.
2. Have existing `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource(s) and don't want to use an external script for migrating.

**Note**: We recommend the `moved block` method as it's more convenient and less error-prone. If you continue with this method, you should still use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 by setting the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` to avoid having to migrate again in the future.

> ### Procedure

Reviewer 5: As part of the procedure are we missing using a removed block, or removing the previous cluster from the state in some way?

Author: changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/e12a19e692efaca0a15ea8fd6cee511d6a2eb061

  - After: Use `mongodbatlas_cloud_backup_schedule` resource instead.

## Best Practices Before Migrating

Before doing any migration create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state).

> ## Migration using Moved block (recommended)

Reviewer 6: suggestion: Add `Option 1:`,  `Option 2:`,  `Option 3:` to these section headings

Author: thanks, I tested in my provider but I'm not convinced with the result of having numbers in main sections

- Before starting, run `terraform plan` to make sure that there are no planned changes.
- Add the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. 
  - Make sure environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` is set in order to use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2. You can also define the environment variable in your local development environment so your tools can use the new format and help you with linting and auto-completion.
  - The [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) can be used to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This is the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration keeping the original Terraform expressions.
  - Alternatively, you can use the `terraform plan -generate-config-out=adv_cluster.tf` method to create the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition, or create it manually.
- Comment out or delete the `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource definition.
- Add the `moved` block to your configuration file, e.g.:
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
}
```

> - Run `terraform plan` and make sure that there are no planned changes, only the moved should be shown. **Important**: Don't apply until planning shows only the moved changes. If it shows other changes, you will need to keep updating the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original `mongodbatlas_cluster` configuration.

Reviewer 6: suggestion: for this step it might be helpful to add here what the expected output should look like (or a link to one of the examples)

Author: good idea, changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/9c213064932bfa3514a2a0230764944f5539435d

  - After: Use `mongodbatlas_cloud_backup_schedule` resource instead.

## Best Practices Before Migrating

Before doing any migration create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state).

> ## Migration using Moved block (recommended)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Migration using the Moved block (recommended)
```

The [moved block](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved) is a Terraform feature that allows to move between resource types. It's conceptually similar to do `removed` and `import` but it's more convenient as it's done in one step, and can be used in `modules`. This is our recommended method to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`.

 The main requirements are:
 - Terraform version 1.8 or later is required, more info in the [State Move doc](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/resources/state-move).

>  - Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` is required, it is enabled by setting environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`. More information can be found in the [resource doc](../resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529) and the [Migration Guide: Advanced Cluster Preview Provider v2](advanced-cluster-preview-provider-v2).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` is required, it is enabled by setting the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`. More information can be found in the [resource doc](../resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529) and the [Migration Guide: Advanced Cluster Preview Provider v2](advanced-cluster-preview-provider-v2).
```

We recommend that you follow another migration process only if you can't meet these requirements.

The process to migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` using the `moved` block is as follows:

> - Before starting, run `terraform plan` to make sure that there are no planned changes.

Reviewer 3: this should be an ordered list instead of an unordered list. Seems like the order of operations matters

Author: changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/b7b3f93a96912c68cb2a50f2c8fe9ab80b29ebdc

- Add the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. 

>   - Make sure environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` is set in order to use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2. You can also define the environment variable in your local development environment so your tools can use the new format and help you with linting and auto-completion.

Reviewer 3: active voice and parallel structure with other list items
```suggestion
  - Set the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` in order to use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2. You can also define the environment variable in your local development environment so your tools can use the new format and help you with linting and auto-completion.
```

>   - The [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) can be used to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This is the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration keeping the original Terraform expressions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - You can use the [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This is the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration keeping the original Terraform expressions.
```

>   - You can use the [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition. This is the recommended method as it will generate a clean configuration keeping the original Terraform expressions.

Reviewer 2: @lantoli I think here it might be useful to refer them to the limitations section which connects well to your "alternatively" point below. wdyt?

Author: thanks @marcosuma , that's a good point, added here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/commit/5e44d133f1843820c6dc16b4b7ddeeff161442cf

  - Alternatively, you can use the `terraform plan -generate-config-out=adv_cluster.tf` method to create the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition, or create it manually.
- Comment out or delete the `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource definition.
- Add the `moved` block to your configuration file, e.g.:
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
}
```

> - Run `terraform plan` and make sure that there are no planned changes, only the moved should be shown. If it shows other changes, you will need to keep updating the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original `mongodbatlas_cluster` configuration. This is an example of no planned changes except the move:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Run `terraform plan` and make sure that there are no planned changes, only the moved block should be shown. If it shows other changes, update the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original `mongodbatlas_cluster` configuration. This is an example of no planned changes except the move:
```

  cloud_backup                 = true # 4 Backup Configuration

  replication_specs {
    num_shards = 1
    regions_config {
      region_name     = "US_EAST_1"
      priority        = 7
      electable_nodes = 3 # 1 Replication Spec Configuration
      analytics_nodes = 1 # 1 Replication Spec Configuration
      read_only_nodes = 0 # 1 Replication Spec Configuration
    }
  }
}
```

### Example 2: New Configuration (`mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`)

```terraform
resource "mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster" "this" {
  project_id     = var.project_id
  name           = "advanced-cluster"
  cluster_type   = "REPLICASET"
  backup_enabled = true # 4 Backup Configuration

  replication_specs {
    region_configs {
      auto_scaling { # 3 Auto Scaling
        disk_gb_enabled = true
      }
      region_name   = "US_EAST_1"
      priority      = 7
      provider_name = "AWS" # 2 Provider Settings

      electable_specs { # 1 Replication Spec Configuration
        instance_size = "M10"
        node_count    = 3
      }
      analytics_specs { # 1 Replication Spec Configuration
        instance_size = "M10"
        node_count    = 1
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> ### Example 3: New Configuration (`mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`) using the Preview of MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0

Reviewer 2: @lantoli I've added this example.. good to have another pair of eyes in case I wrote it incorrectly

Author: I checked it and executed it confirming that it's equivalent to the cluster in example 2.  I just fixed a small typo in the guide: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/772155d93fd763c6c068da4385b6449cc06ab837

  - After: Use `cluster_id` attribute instead to get the Atlas cluster id.

## Alternatives to using the MongoDB Atlas CLI plugin to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition

If you've encountered [limitations](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform#limitations) when using the [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition, this section can help you understand what alternatives you have to generate it. Some options might be limited if you are using our MongoDB Atlas Terraform resources through a module (**Module maintainer**).

- **Option 1**: Follow the steps 3. and 4. of the ["migration using import"](#migration-using-import) section by temporarily adding an `import block` and executing the `terraform plan -generate-config-out=adv_cluster.tf` command. Once you have the generated configuration for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` you can use it in your configuration files and remove the `import block`. **Note**: Terraform modules don't support `import` blocks so this option is not possible if you are a module maintainer.

> - **Option 2**: Remove the limitations from your `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource and use the Atlas CLI plugin. Given the output, proceed with restoring the remaining configuration in the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Option 2 (Coming soon)**: Remove the limitations from your `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource and use the Atlas CLI plugin. Given the output, proceed with restoring the remaining configuration in the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource.
```

    }
  }
  ```

> Alternatively you can use the [Atlas CLI plugin](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform) to generate the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource definition from a `mongodbatlas_cluster` definition. This will generate a clean configuration keeping the original Terraform expressions. Please be aware of the [plugin limitations](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/atlas-cli-plugin-terraform#limitations) and always review the generated configuration.

Reviewer 4: Again, we should make sure this is really ready before we point folks to it or not it's coming soon.

Reviewer 2: answered [above](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079#discussion_r1982840291), let's make a decision there

   - `cluster_id`
   - `bi_connector_config`
6. Re-use existing [Terraform expressions](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions). All fields in the generated configuration will have static values. Look in your previous configuration for:
8. Re-use existing [Terraform expressions](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions). All fields in the generated configuration will have static values. Look in your previous configuration for:
   - variables, for example: `var.project_id`
   - Terraform keywords, for example: `for_each`, `count`, and `depends_on`
7. Re-run `terraform apply` to ensure you have no planned changes: `No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.`
8. Update the references from your previous cluster resource: `mongodbatlas_cluster.this.XXXX` to the new `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this.XXX`.
   - Double check [output-changes](#output-changes) to ensure the underlying configuration stays unchanged.
9.  Replace your existing clusters with the ones from `adv_cluster.tf` and run `terraform state rm mongodbatlas_cluster.this`. Without this step, Terraform will create a plan to delete your existing cluster.

> 1.  Remove the import block created in step 2.

Reviewer 2: @lantoli I want to understand why we removed these two lines 184 and 185?

Author: point 1 is about removing old cluster and do state rm or removed block.
point 3 & 4 are about importing it.

so these steps were duplicated, and remove import block is not needed, it can be left as documentation of the migration done

> ## Main Changes Between `mongodbatlas_cluster` and `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`

Reviewer 4: A great section to link to above in the instructions and even intro!

Reviewer 4: Also is this really main or all changes?

Reviewer 2: Yes I linked it in `## Why do we have both `mongodbatlas_cluster` and `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resources?`

I would call them main since we're not eg talking of the syntax changes

Author: agree to keep "main"

   - `connection_strings`
   - `cluster_id`
   - `bi_connector_config`
7. Re-use existing [Terraform expressions](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions). All fields in the generated configuration will have static values. Look in your previous configuration for:
   - variables, for example: `var.project_id`
   - Terraform keywords, for example: `for_each`, `count`, and `depends_on`
8. Re-run `terraform apply` to ensure you have no planned changes: `No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.`
9. Update the references from your previous cluster resource: `mongodbatlas_cluster.this.XXXX` to the new `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this.XXX`.
   - Double check [output-changes](#output-changes) to ensure the underlying configuration stays unchanged.
10.  Replace your existing clusters with the ones from `adv_cluster.tf` and run `terraform state rm mongodbatlas_cluster.this`. Without this step, Terraform will create a plan to delete your existing cluster.
11.  Remove the import block created in step 2.
12.  Re-run `terraform apply` to ensure you have no planned changes: `No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.`

> ### Terraform Actions

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if this is needed

Author: just saw your message, I think we reached to the same conclusion, change here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/6cb8e1ce181b316f9fe01345629c65f7a664948e

Reviewer 2: @lantoli are we talking about the the same thing? I was talking about "Terraform Actions"

Author: @marcosuma  you're right I misunderstood and thought you were refering to previous steps. I've moved the content to the point where it belongs and fix a small typo: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/aecd45adb2a5da1468b075821281d302ef3fbe9f

   - `advanced_configuration`
   - `connection_strings`
   - `cluster_id`
   - `bi_connector_config`
7. Re-use existing [Terraform expressions](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions). All fields in the generated configuration will have static values. Look in your previous configuration for:
   - variables, for example: `var.project_id`
   - Terraform keywords, for example: `for_each`, `count`, and `depends_on`
8. Re-run `terraform apply` to ensure you have no planned changes: `No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.`
9. Update the references from your previous cluster resource: `mongodbatlas_cluster.this.XXXX` to the new `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this.XXX`.
   - Double check [output-changes](#output-changes) to ensure the underlying configuration stays unchanged.
10.  Replace your existing clusters with the ones from `adv_cluster.tf` and run `terraform state rm mongodbatlas_cluster.this`. Without this step, Terraform will create a plan to delete your existing cluster.
11.  Remove the import block created in step 2.

> 22.  Re-run `terraform apply` to ensure you have no planned changes: `No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
12.  Re-run `terraform apply` to ensure you have no planned changes: `No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.`
```
